welcome to topcast and to an unusual out
of the ordinary episode today
what I'm going to do is provide a
summary and Analysis of Ein rand's
objectivist epistemology
now I'm going directly to her book
introduction to objectivist epistemology
now I do spend time critiquing other
kinds of epistemology in particular
something called Bayesian epistemology
when I can find it and when I think it
has a prominent place somewhere and it's
worth doing so for example in the works
of Stephen Pinker Stephen Pinker tries
to explain rationality to a broad
audience so he has great reach and
therefore great influence so sometimes I
think it's actually worth my while to do
something of the form of a public
service to try to unpack some of those
misconceptions and of course it gives me
an opportunity to explain what I think
is is the better theory of epistemology
well let's be honest the best theory of
epistemology epistemology what is known
about how knowledge is created period
and I'm also on David Deutsch's side
here when he explains that in for
example the fabric of reality his
purpose there was to explain our deepest
fundamental theories of reality no one
has enough time in their day to go
around putting out all the spotfires of
misconceptions that are everywhere
because error is everywhere era is
ubiquitous so it's very very hard to
counter all of the false things that are
out there in the case of false
epistemologies there's false folk
epistemology there's bayesianism and
there's a number of others and well iron
Rand has an epistemology now there's a
few reasons to counter what iron Rand
has to say or to explain what she's
trying to get at in her epistemology and
why it is worthy of critique one reason
is that I think the broad philosophy of
objectivism can be incorporated into a
worldview broadly speaking with papyrian
epistemology as the epistemology of that
worldview einrand was a great defender
of Freedom personal freedom personal
responsibility that you are in charge of
your life and you need to make the most
of your life great important message
that economic systems and human
flourishing is best facilitated by
non-coercive means that we can all rise
in wealth and power by freely trading
with one another
by minimizing the role of government in
our life and government coercion in our
life so in that sense I'm very much on
her side the problem is that the
epistemology doesn't move Beyond
basically what the Ancients gave us
she has a very euclidean view of
epistemology believing that one must
begin with axioms and using rules of
inference logical rules of inference one
arrives at conclusions knowledge and
that those axioms are arrived at by some
means of observation out there in the
world you drive the knowledge from
external reality in fact for her as
we'll see today we'll read a little part
and there's very little distance between
epistemology and ontology and in this
way she has a lot of difficulty
grappling with error and fallibalism in
fact it doesn't appear at all as a
central part of her conception of what
knowledge is or how it's constructed
this is a great flaw and if you're
epistemology isn't able to account for
Flaws errors that people make the
ubiquitous mistakes that's a problem
because it should be able to do that
epistemology could also be regarded as
the theory of errors how it is that
errors are created because all of our
knowledge contains errors that needs to
be a part of epistemology a part of
understanding how it is we learn about
the world
that we can in fact manage to scratch a
little bit of Truth out of reality to
learn just a little but in doing so we
also reveal to ourselves or the
ignorance we still have and how indeed
some of the things that we knew were
completely flawed or at least flawed in
part Pop is epistemology accounts for
all of this another difficulty is is
that Rand herself writes that
epistemology really is the deepest part
of philosophy I'm not sure if I agree
with it there even though my personal
biggest interest in philosophy is
epistemology but whether it's the
deepest I don't know this notion of
having a deepest part of philosophy I
think is misconceived arising out of her
conception of how knowledge is generated
so that's a problem and I guess finally
what I would say and why I'm making this
sort of podcast today whether or not it
appears in the main feed or not I'm I'm
yet to decide is that Ram's followers
are great Ally lies in the fight against
tyranny authoritarianism socialism
collectivism people being fed a message
that they don't need to make much of
their life but don't worry the
government will look after you this kind
of thing that doesn't give people a
desire to Aspire to achieve and create
and to be great out there in the world
to have an influence and to have an
effect we're being fed messages from
elsewhere that you're a victim that
you're powerless anyway in the face of
the difficulties that are before you and
Randolph is a different view so I'm on
her side and I'm on the side of the
people who follow in her footsteps and
promote her message difficulties they
also insist that objectivist
epistemology is correct and they're very
unwilling to move on this not least
because the epistemology says that the
way in which you construct knowledge
almost guarantees you've got the truth
so once you've got the the truth you
kind of there's no need to consider
anything else outside of that not at all
objectivists are like this you're on
Brook speaks eloquently about how indeed
you can improve your epistemology you
can improve on Rand but he says that
objectivism is the philosophy of Rand
and so it's a strong defender of
objectivist epistemology I think very
eloquent speaker however again if the
epistemology insinuates suggests impart
implies that the reality that reality
out there ontology can actually be
understood perfectly in some way that
what you're doing when you construct
knowledge is actually get the truth
that's going to be very hard to change
someone's mind on anything including the
epistemology because they believe
they're in possession of the truth after
all what does the epistemology call
itself
objectivists it's objective it it's
correct in some way well they would
think that of course under the papyrian
framework what we mean by objective is
could be wrong there's an objective way
in which it could be wrong and applying
actual objective knowledge which is
critical rationalism the actual concept
of how we have knowledge out there in
the world Beyond Minds it says that one
should expect to be wrong and
misconceived just sometimes you don't
know how well here's a case where indeed
it's wrong and misconceived papyrians
will be able to spot the errors the
fundamental flaws and objectivist
epistemology will read straight from
Iran's own words on this in Black and
Whites and indeed see it is a
misconception it is false the claims it
is making are just not possible and I
should also say at this point that the
way Rand writes her style of writing
when it comes to epistemology is unclear
abstract philosophizing and my deepest
misconception here apart from the lack
of ability on the point her lack of
understanding how conjectures are formed
and guesses are made in the world and
refutations and all that papyrian stuff
my difficulty is the impenetrable style
that she uses of philosophizing in the
abstract
disconnected from Fields like science
popper implored us to always begin with
problems somewhere science is perhaps
the preeminent example of this you look
at science and see how it's done how is
knowledge there constructed he talked
about the Ancients and how they tried to
construct knowledge and here were the
problems in trying to construct
knowledge there he referred to things
like the tension between different
cosmologies how Newtonian physics came
about and comparing that to Einstein's
general relativity and how these two
things were incompatible making
incompatible claims and yet they both
represented knowledge of a kind and how
is that possible if they contradicted
one another all of that is answered
within the popular in framework and he
speaks about specific instances of how
the epistemology Works he does this
across his Philosophy by the way it's a
crucial absolutely crucial indispensable
part of philosophy philosophizing in the
abstract without referring to real life
examples out there in the history of
ideas who end up in a cul-de-sac of
Naval gazing you're you're considering
things like oh how is this word defined
you fall into
wittgenstein's trap of reducing
philosophy to just a debate about what
words mean that's not philosophy
philosophy is about solving actual
problems and creating actual
philosophical knowledge making progress
progress mind you and if you're defining
things into existence that this is the
definition of that this is what this
must be this is what this thing must be
necessarily you have a closed system
this is a problem it means it can't be
improved it means you think that there
can be no error there and Papa's entire
philosophy is very much about error the
possible errors in his own philosophy
and the areas that we're going to find
everywhere else
and it's just this gradual correction of
the errors that allows us to learn
something that there's the mistakes that
we've made so far here are the ideas
that work right now and therefore
correspond to Something in reality but
they will still those ideas that we have
about that reality the knowledge that
we've constructed of that really we
should still expect to be imperfect
incomplete not quite right misconceived
in some way and this is accounted for in
popular and epistemology but not
in objectivist epistemology so without
further Ado I've spoken for over 10
minutes now as an introduction so let me
get into rand's work introduction to
objectivist epistemology and as I say
the best we can do the greatest respect
we can show for any idea is to critique
it if I didn't care about rand's
epistemology I wouldn't bother doing
this but I'm bothering to do this for
any objectivists out there who want to
understand why it is that the
epistemologist look keep the rest keep
the stuff on capitalism keep the stuff
on personal responsibility on the virtue
of selfishness and so on and so great
wonderful stuff but the epistemology is
thought and in fact
more importantly you don't need Rands
epistemology Rands very very flawed
foundationally flawed epistemology in
order to keep the rest because there is
an epistemology out there the popular
poppers version of epistemology
augmented by David Deutsch that will
allow you to speak about these things in
a far better way because it will be
conjectural then explanatory and you
yourself will be fallible in explaining
this stuff and so you should be more
willing to change your mind let's dive
in her book contains eight chapters and
I'm definitely not going to read all of
them but it is a it's a short piece and
then there's some material in there by
other contributors and there's various
other essays and that kind of thing but
I want to begin where Rand begins in
trying to explain epistemology and to
see where she goes wrong
almost from the get-go so there is a
summary of the of what's to come of the
chapters to come in the book let's read
a little bit of this just to get a taste
because if you are someone who listens
to top cast this will be jarring to you
as it is to me
so the summary Begins the first chapter
is called cognition and measurement
and she writes quote the base of all
man's knowledge is the perceptual level
of awareness
it is in the form of percepts that man
grasped the evidence of his senses and
apprehend reality
the building block of man's knowledge is
the concept of existent which is
implicit in every percept
the implicit concept existent goes under
three stages of development in man's
Minds entity identity unit
the ability to regard entities as units
is man's distinctive method of cognition
a unit is an existent regarded as a
separate member of a group of two or
more similar members measurement is the
identification of a quantitative
relationship by means of a standard that
serves as a unit the purpose of
measurement is to expand the range of
man's knowledge beyond the directly
perceivable concrete end quote so we've
got a raft of errors here just starting
with the last one first directly
perceivable concretes
directly perceivable what is directly
perceivable now let's consider she uses
very very simple Concepts she talks
about
good tables and cats and trees and that
kind of thing so so apparently you can
directly perceive the table well can you
or do you learn that do you learn that
because a child encountering the world
for the first time doesn't see tables
they just see objects and they they
conjecture over time you point at a
table to a young child and you say table
and they look and they they don't have
language yet but what's going through
the child's mind
is the child thinking well okay table
thing up high does that mean the the
bookcase is also a table because the
child's presumably just a toddler down
on the ground or a baby perhaps what are
they thinking about what you mean by
table when they first encountered this
word do they think object with four legs
in which case chairs are also included
but then of course when you eventually
point to a chair then the child realizes
well chairs and tables must be different
things
that's a chair that's a table okay so
I'm ruling out that that thing the chair
counts as a table so what is a table
well maybe one day they're crawling
around on the floor and they they point
up at Dad's desk that he works at and
they say table and dad goes no no desk
this is a desk this is a little bit
different and then now they now they're
really a little bit confused so what's
the difference between a desk and a
towel no the dead other desk is where
dad works the tables where we eat dinner
and so on it goes of this process of
guessing what this word refers to and
checking in against reality in this case
what other people are telling the child
but this consideration of simple objects
like this misses the point really of how
knowledge is created proper explanatory
knowledge what we're talking about there
is how is word formation occurring how
can we get to directly perceivable
concretes let's consider a real life
example okay rather than this
abstraction about this is why people
make fun of Philosophy by the way anyone
is not a philosopher they talk about
things like this Ricky gervaiser did
philosophy he would joke about the fact
that you know you'd spend lecture after
lecture talking specifically about
something ridiculous like that like you
know what is a table is this really a
table do you know what to tell you
you're knocking on it and you're saying
table or not you know he felt like at
the end he just wanted to pick one up
and smash the table over everyone's head
inside the lecture theater it's like
there you go that's a table now now are
you in any doubt it was just kind of
letting you know it's an understandable
impulse the frustration filter talking
about tables and simple objects let's
talk about something more interesting
you look up and this is the one little
same story but listeners the top cast
will be bored at this point
but for any objectivist listening you
look up into the sky at night and you
see little pin Pricks of light in the
sky and especially if you're with a
child and you know you point at the sky
you say to the child stars you know
stars look at those Stars up there what
does the child think ah little pinpricks
of light cold and dim they're the stars
and so perhaps the next night that the
child says you know mummy Daddy can I go
outside and we can look at the stars and
you say yes sure what are the what are
the stars do you know what stars are and
the the child says well they're tiny and
they're cold and they're dim
and are they right about that now on
rand's account in some way shape or form
they are because are they not directly
perceivable concretes in some way the
light that you're getting which is all
you have access to by the way even if
you're looking at a table well this
process of seeing involves nothing more
than photons entering your retina and
then by the way you're not your retina
and so the the retina has to then
convert the photons into chemical
signals which then are converted into
electrical signals which end up being
sent via the optic nerve back towards
your brain whereas electrical crackles
but even the electrical crackles being
your brain are not you and not thoughts
so it is what's going on in your mind in
some way shape or form that we don't
understand but it's correlated with this
brain activity okay all of that's just
to say that seeing itself even something
as simple as a table is a complicated
theory-laden process as we say but when
you try to explain to the child no look
however old they happen to be when
there's becomes an important question to
them that those objects in the sky are
called stars are not small they're
actually vast huge spheres of hydrogen
in the main and they're not cold but hot
among the hottest objects in the entire
universe at the core Millions upon
millions of degrees Celsius and we know
what's going on there we know although
light years away we know that at the
center of those Stars the core of those
stars are hydrogen nuclei protons being
smashed together to form helium but we
can't see those no one will ever see
that the the theories of exactly how it
is we come to that knowledge also tell
us that it's literally impossible to put
an instrument there much less a person
to see what's going on directly in the
core of those Stars there's nothing can
survive at that temperature but we know
what's happening there we know what's
happening there because of a chain of
reasoning but importantly explanation
possibly misconceived error-prone always
can be improved but not derived for any
particular observation we're
interpreting we're not deriving we're
interpreting the light that we're
receiving scant amounts of Light by the
way
and there's nothing so nothing's
directly perceived in that sense we're
not learning directly perceive the light
as I say the light is striking the back
of our retinas and being converted into
electrical signals is that direct
perception doesn't sound like it what is
direct we're Minds we don't have direct
access to anything we're stuck inside of
our heads that's what's going on there
and by the way if you do want to
directly if you do want to perceive any
of this stuff really in order to figure
out the truth of the matter or closer to
the truth a more close to real
description of reality explanation of
reality about what's going on inside of
those Stars you need instrumentation you
need to put stuff between you and the
star telescopes and spectroscopes to
analyze the light and then after again a
huge chain of explanation or
astrophysics and nuclear physics you'll
eventually come up with this idea that
there are these complex nuclear fusion
reactions going on many light years away
in the core of that star that thing that
we call a star rand's epistemology
cannot cannot explain this and one of
the reasons that she doesn't begin with
science she doesn't begin with problems
in science about how this happens it's
it's this abstraction away from anything
other than the language she's focusing
on the language talking about what a
measurement is
that's a part of science but it's not a
crucial part of epistemology the next
chapter she summarizes it's called
concept formation and again you're going
to hear that this is very very abstract
this isn't explaining things clearly
about how knowledge is constructed so
concept formation she says quote
similarity is the relationship between
two or more existence which possess the
same characteristics but in different
measure or degree the process of concept
formation consists of mentally isolating
two or more existence by means of their
distinguishing characteristic and
retaining this characteristic while
omitting their particular measurements
on the principle that these measurements
must exist in some quantity may exist in
any quantity a concept is a mental
integration of two or more units
possessing the same distinguishing
characteristics which their particular
measurements are emitted end quote so
this idea of unit is a fundamental
constituent of an epistemology of a
piece of knowledge that cannot be
further broken down in other words
there's no explanation for it it's just
axiomatic it's self-evidence or
something like that in other words on
that particular point you can't be
mistaken it's the foundation the brick
out of which the rest of the edifice of
knowledge under rand's conception is
going to be built it's a platonic notion
justifying your beliefs in some way how
can they be justified by recourse to
explaining whatever the bit of knowledge
you have is in terms of things that were
Justified earlier until you get to
bedrock epistemological Bedrock almost
every other epistemology speaks in this
way they they need a foundation they
need the thing that you start with
that's indivisible you can't be mistaken
about and therefore you can't because
you can't be mistaken about it you get
to knowledge which is truth this is
truth in some way by this process of
logical derivation or induction as of
course Rand actually supports this
notion of induction she endorses this
idea of induction which we know popper
completely refuted and showed was
completely Superfluous to the project of
knowledge creation okay so I'll begin
reading a little bit from rand's own
words on this it's important to notice
that these things exist in historical
context she wasn't a great fan of
Emmanuel Kant nor am I and so what she
was trying to do was to escape from the
vision of epistemology that can't had
quite rightly he distinguished between
analytic and synthetic things and
thought that there was a a neat division
that you could make between these two
things now never mind what that is but
she didn't realize that well there's
another way to go namely conjectural
knowledge in order to navigate the
Waters of how knowledge has actually
created so I'm not going to worry about
concerning myself with the critique of
Emmanuel kant's work so in her Section
her chapter called concept formation
she writes a quote a concept is a mental
integration of two or more units which
are isolated according to a specific
characteristic and United by a specific
definition the units involved may be any
aspect of reality entities attributes
actions qualities relationships Etc they
may be perceptual concretes or other
earlier formed Concepts the act of
isolation involved is a process of
abstraction a a selective mental focus
that takes out or separates a certain
aspect of reality from all others eg
isolates a certain attribute from the
entities possessing it or a certain
action from the entities performing it
Etc
the uniting involved is not a mere sum
but an integration I a blending of the
units into a single new mental entity
which is used thereafter as a single
unit of thought which can be broken into
its component units whenever required
end quote so there is a kind of correct
idea here it's a steel man the position
that you're going from reality to
abstract ideas yeah absolutely this is
what you know papyrian epistemology
would say and I think most people who
engage in epistemology would agree with
these are you have objective reality out
there and somehow or other you have to
go to this abstraction this abstraction
being the knowledge itself the knowledge
itself is a form of representation of
reality but of course where the units
come from in rand's view is the problem
with this because the problem is that
her epistemology would have it that
there are these fundamental units that
you directly perceive that they're the
absolute truth and then integrating
these things once you've got these
different units you can put them
together as she says there it's not
summing them together it's not just
adding them together it's integrating
them together in some way shape or form
and then you get the knowledge and then
the knowledge of course is in a sense
being
derived from these more fundamental
units which themselves are derived from
reality and this is why she thinks it's
objectivist okay because you're just
talking about reality so long as this
process of integration is correct in
some way how we guarantee it's correct
on the other hand is this is is anyone's
guess now the next paragraph really gets
to the Crux of the matter where it comes
down to Rand not being too much
different from Wittgenstein and her
approach to philosophy here and so in
that sense I'm afraid to say she's a
standard philosopher that it needs to be
lumped in with all those other
philosophers that aren't popper to be
honest
specifically yeah well let me just
explain she writes quote in order to be
used as a single unit the enormous sum
integrated by our concept has to be
given the form of a single specific
perceptual concrete which will
differentiate it from all other
concretes and from all other Concepts
this is the function performed by
language language is a code of visual
auditory symbols that serves the psycho
epistemological function of converting
Concepts into the mental equivalent of
concretes the language is the exclusive
domain and Tool of Concepts every word
we use with the exception of proper
names is a symbol that denotes a concept
I.E that stands for an unlimited number
of concretes of a certain kind end quote
so there we have it very early on in her
discussion of epistemology she's placing
language and words front and center that
really the problems of epistemology the
problems in epistemology the problem of
explaining how knowledge is created is a
problem of how to understand a language
this of course is going to leave out the
overwhelming majority of knowledge that
people have
knowledge that people have is inexplicit
not expressed in language so immediately
you're cutting yourself off from all the
stuff that we know
I know how to ride a bike
but I don't know how to put it all into
words perfectly
after all if we knew how to put into
words how it is that people ride bikes
then all you would need to do is to take
a perfectly competent English speaker
almost perfectly confident who didn't
know how to ride a bike and explain it
to them with words but that's not what
happens
the words almost provide no help
whatsoever
a person who cannot speak can learn how
to ride a bike they don't need to put it
into words they don't even need to put
it into words to themselves there's all
sorts of things that people know
famously people talk about women knowing
what childbirth feels like but they
can't explain it they know it's painful
but merely explaining it doesn't give
man an idea of what childbirth really
feels like
there's all sorts of stuff we know even
the stuff we can put into words some of
it the explanations of the things that
we put into words can't that cells be
put into words because you you get to a
point where you're just relying on
definitions or you're moving in certain
all definitions arrive are either
circular or lead to some kind of
infinite regress ultimately they're
circular but if you focus your
epistemology on language problems of
language problems of how to define words
Define words then you're divorcing
yourself from the way knowledge out
there in the real objective world is
actually being constructed right now
explanations and progress is being made
and how Stuff improves and so on and so
forth it's not just an integrated it's
not just an integration of Concepts
we're discovering new things all the
time and we're having to invent words
for those new things that we discover
often for problems that we have and if
you go down this road of thinking that
epistemology in some way reduces or a
foundational problem within epistemology
is how words are defined then you you
leave out science you live out history
and even politics and and how problems
arise in those areas which can have
epistemological philosophical Solutions
and instead the examples that you're
going to deploy in order to illustrate
your epistemology are going to be about
you know how we Define things like table
rather than you know how is it that
Einstein came up with the theory of
general relativity what was going on
there what was the process that led
Darwin to come up with evolution by
natural selection you need to start
there in problems how is this knowledge
being constructed how these explanations
being arrived what's the process that's
going on there and does that process
have analogs elsewhere is it indeed
identical to what is being done in
history economics people's personal
lives every every other domain science
is used by Carl popper as a case study
because it is so neat and Crisp And it
allows you to just see well it works
there clearly it works everywhere else
as well this idea of conjecturing going
out into the world and testing those
conjectures against reality that's what
works everywhere that's the only way
that knowledge can be produced created
actually brought into being by a
creative human being but Rand is kind of
getting there with this idea of
abstraction but never really moves
Beyond just how words are being defined
she goes on to say quote words transform
Concepts into mental entities
definitions provide them with identity
words without definitions are not
language but inarticulate sounds we
shall discuss definitions later and at
length the above is a general
description of the nature of Concepts as
products of certain mental processes but
the question of epistemology is what
precisely is the nature of that process
to what precisely do concepts refer in
reality end quote kind of the central
question of epistemology is is yes
knowledge creation so I think she kind
of gets that right the nature of that
process what is that process a
particular mental concept that the the
products of a certain mental process
yeah okay well that's explanatory
knowledge but of course we know that
there's knowledge in let's say DNA the
knowledge of how to build certain
organisms but she needs to focus a
certain kind of mental process I mean
that even that is a poor way of
explaining what's going would I just say
the central question of epistemology is
about knowledge so something with
knowledge her knowledge is created
that's what epistemology is about how
does this thing called knowledge
actually arise in the world even if you
think it's only about mental processes
name the thing name the thing I'm not
I'm barely seeing here this word no
knowledge actually appearing in this
part of her discussion of epistemology
just talking about Concepts concept
formation the next part is very very
telling so let's see what kind of
example she draws on in order to
illustrate her points again consider
pop-up what what does Papa do Papa goes
straight to Historic problems in let's
say geometry what the nature of number
is you know he talked about a Plato's
view of number and and what problems he
was working on at the time what problems
Galileo and Kepler and Newton and
Einstein had now different versions of
atomic theory were arrived at specifics
times in history places and people and
that's why his philosophy is so rich
when it comes to epistemology because
he's he's telling you look here's the
historical event you know you go to
Papa's work you go to almost any one of
his works you know realism and the aim
of science or something like that and he
never stops talking about these guys and
what they were doing
Kepler Galileo Newton Einstein goldbach
he talks about specific people people
working in physics and biology and
geology and Mathematics and what they
were doing and as a case study it's like
what's going on here how are they
actually doing what they're doing what
problems did they have how did they
overcome them what was the process of
coming up with these ideas and then
dismissing certain ideas but retaining
others and then having the overturning
of ideas how can this be explained
especially how could this be explained
in traditional conceptions like Rands
where you're just perceiving reality or
observing reality if that's what you're
doing and and your senses can be trusted
in some way I'll provide you with
reliable knowledge how could you come to
different conclusions wildly different
conclusions by the way the process is
not reliable why isn't it why are we
error-prone that there's no focus on
errors in being error-prone in rand's
epistemology it's about how we get to
truth
rather than how we correct errors this
is why pop as epistemology works because
we can talk about truth absolutely we
can talk about objectivity but only
because we're able to remove falsehoods
from the world remove error from the
World by having these problems what are
the problems well problem there's a lack
of explanation a lack of knowing
something
and in order to create that knowledge
you have to conjecture but the
conjecture is going to be faulty and
flawed in some ways but you don't know
how ahead of time it's not deductive and
you're not inducing it from the
observations that you make of reality so
what what Rand goes on to say is quote
let us now examine the process of
forming the simplest concept the concept
of a single attribute chronologically
this is not the first concept that a
child would grasp but it's the simplest
one epistemologically for instance the
concept of length if a child considers a
match a pencil and a stick he observes
that length is the attribute they have
in common but their specific lengths
differ the difference is one of
measurement in order to form the concept
length the child's mind retains the
attribute and omits its particular
measurements or more precisely if the
process were identified in words it
would consist of the following length
must exist in some quantity but may
exist in any quantity I shall identify
as length that attribute of any existent
possessing it which can be
quantitatively related to a unit of
length without specifying the quantity
the child does not think in such words
he has as yet no knowledge of words but
that is the nature of the process which
his mind performs wordlessly and that is
the principle which his mind follows
when having grasped the concept length
by observing the three objects he uses
it to identify the attribute of length
in a piece of string a ribbon a belt a
corridor or a straight and quote this is
abstract philosophizing without being
connected to reality here's the problem
we don't actually know what the process
is that goes on inside the mind of a
child she's trying to get down to some
Bedrock here and yet this very idea is
itself a conjecture that is untestable
that we don't know how exactly children
without words infants are forming
knowledge it must be this is why we must
stop in place why we must start with
problems in places where we can actually
talk sensibly about this stuff we don't
have access to someone's brain their
internal mind especially prior to when
they can speak we do have access to
something like science and the history
of Science in the history of ideas as
case studies to look at stuff and then
you start there because however
knowledge is being created there is how
knowledge is created period so we can
talk sensibly about that because we can
actually argue backwards and forwards
refuting each other with specific
arguments and observations we can make
about the history of ideas talking about
what's going on inside the mind of a
child is a misdirection she can just
assert whatever she likes here's my
assertion the child is conjecturing
reality as I said earlier the guessing
at what's going on
possibly at concrete objects the very
problem with saying that they're
starting with something like a concept
like length is you're diving straight
into the abstract this is not the
concrete I very much doubt that this is
one of the first Concepts that the child
learns at all at all you might want to
talk to a child psychologist I don't
know that children are actually able to
distinguish between things of different
length Piaget talked about this among
others that it's not abstract concept
formation that happens first at all when
you look at the development of Joy when
you actually understand what is going on
with babies and infants the the
hierarchy of ways in which children
build their knowledge create knowledge
is perhaps to begin with simple objects
to actually begin if you want to talk in
Rand terms to talk about your table okay
table is this thing bed is this thing
mum mum is that thing you know the first
word is usually mum right mum and so mum
or dad and so they've developed an idea
that this object there is mum right so
there's no concept of length and height
and width whether or not they have that
who knows who knows we don't know in
other words we have no good explanation
but Rand is only imagining this into
existence and perhaps you can't imagine
more than this alternative possibilities
to this
but as I say I think it's concrete
objects now I can't prove that either
she thinks it's abstract Concepts like
length
length of all things that the the child
doesn't have a word for length but
understands length well I don't know
about that this this is abstract
philosophizing we need to bring it into
the real world of actual problems and I
would say in science just as Papa does
let's talk about what Newton was doing
when he came up with Calculus or what he
was doing when he came up with the
inverse Square law for gravitation
what's actually happening there how what
are this what are this process involve
what problems was he solving you know
you had people like Ptolemy the ancient
Greek mapping the movement of celestial
bodies across the sky he noticed planets
there he had a problem because these
things called planets these Wanderers in
the sky weren't obeying the usual rules
that went on with all the other objects
in the sky are namely the stars at night
which all did the same kind of motion
but the planets didn't and so I came up
with this idea of well geocentrism the
Earth is at the center and then these
other things are in the solar system but
they're moving around the earth and this
is why you're getting this strange
motion but he couldn't properly account
for it so later on you had Copernicus
come along and say well maybe the sun's
at the center this can help to explain
this and then Galileo came along Kepler
and they were saying well you know maybe
it's not perfect circles but but but
ellipses that these things are moving
and maybe that will explain the Motions
a little bit better so it's it's these
problems they're each guessing at a
slightly different version of the
previous Theory the previous Theory had
something going for it it explained
something but it wasn't always right so
they improved on how by refuting what
went before adding something to it doing
making observations ruling stuff out
this is true for Grand theories of
Science and physics and cosmology all
the way down to how people individual
people must be generating knowledge
after all those guys were independent
were individual people and Newton was an
individual mind creating knowledge at a
very high level explanatory high level
knowledge but he was doing it ever since
he was with child and it was the same
process he used the same process to
figure out the inverse Square law of
gravitation by considering a particular
problem among other things the motion of
planets across the sky as well as
objects Falling Towards the Earth okay
there's these very complex high level
problems he used that process whatever
that process was going on yeah sure in
his mind but which could then be written
down and transmitted to other people via
paper and various other names
that process was the same process that
he used to form the very earliest ideas
that he had as a child as an infant as a
baby and again what was that process
coming up with the idea how by creating
it how we don't know if we knew we could
program computers to do that but we
can't it's this special feature that
people have of generating explanatory
knowledge but we know we do it we we
conjecture explanations
we don't derive them from outside they
come from within us and we compare them
to the outside it's can't before the
horse to say that what we're doing is
observing the world and getting the
knowledge from the world no
we're encountering a problem we we have
an observation that just doesn't fit
with our existing understanding of
reality
and then we go about trying to
conjecture new ideas and in all of that
stuff that I just explained about how
you know Newton might have done what he
did and you know how he followed Kepler
and Galileo who are trying to fix
problems with ptolemy's ideas and this
idea of constructing knowledge I'm not
talking about words and language and
definitions and concept formation and
identity and this very very abstract
removed from reality philosophizing that
Ein Rand is doing here
who what she's doing is very very
subjectivists it's very very focused on
how a mind might works but we don't have
access to the mind is the problem and
she's assuming that this is what happens
that you know you're we're trying to
figure out how this concept of length
the length is a high level abstract idea
very abstract and she goes on to say
quote the same principle directs the
process of forming concepts of entities
for instance the concept table the
child's mind isolates two or more tables
from other objects by focusing on their
distinctive characteristic their shape
he observes that their shapes vary but
one characteristic in common a flat
level surface and supports he forms the
concept of table by retaining the
characteristic and emitting all
particular measurements not only the
measurements of shape but of all the
other characteristics of tables many of
which he is not aware of at the time end
quote no no that is just pure
speculation and I think it completely
false too by the way
a child when learning language and this
is again we're removing ourselves from
philosophy we're here talking about how
people learn language and learn Words
which yeah okay it's got something to do
with knowledge creation but it's so hard
to talk about because we don't have
access to the mind of an infant child we
can't interrogate them about what's
going on how are you doing that because
they lack the language but we can talk
about adults who are forming complex
theories
we can actually see the process that's
been written down at length and we know
the history of ideas what must have gone
on
and if we've got questions we can look
at problems right now in science and to
see how those problems are solved and
where unsolved problems exist
this is the where knowledge is being
created right now in an obvious way this
is why genuine epistemology talks about
that and why Papa talks about that he
talked about his contemporaries trying
to create knowledge at the time because
it's a nice clean neat way it doesn't
mean that he was able to solve the
problems of uh that they were having
that those scientists were having for
example with quantum theory to
understand what was going on there you
know he had the wrong idea but at least
he was focused on what they were doing
about trying to come up with
explanations
this is where epistemology needs to
begin in science or at least in some
other subject where we're constructing
knowledge theories explanations not this
stuff about what's going on inside the
mind of a child we don't know what's
going on inside the mind of a child
exactly but I can say right now that
this is wrong this is going to be wrong
what she said there is that the child's
mind isolates two or more tables from
other objects by focusing on their
distinctive characteristic their shape
and quite really is she sure about that
how I don't know like a baby is looking
around the room and seeing stuff
now is it the shape the tables come in a
thousand and one different shapes some
are circles some are high some are low
some can sit on your lap you know the
stable table type things are desks
tables maybe it is I think it will be
very hard early on
for the child to distinguish between
what a table is and what isn't a table
coffee tables and dining tables and
desks and tables it's bedside tables
these things are all tables we know as
adults eventually Having learned all
these things at tables you know your
bedside tester draws is sometimes called
a bedside table but it's got drawers in
it like so how is that a table this this
way of doing philosophy in epistemology
is bankrupt because we don't know
exactly how it happens so starting there
is a really bad way to build up the rest
of your epistemology because you're in
the realm of pure speculation unable to
be tested and unable to be refuted well
I'm refuting it now but what I'm saying
is they can just stand back the
objectivist can stand back and just
insist they can just be dogmatic and say
no this is how it happens and I can say
no it doesn't and no one's going to make
any progress because there is no way of
making progress I can't interrogate the
mind of a pre-verbal child and so say
how is it that you're eliminating
objects out there in the universe that
aren't tables from ones that are what
are you doing I've got no access to that
her vision of epistemology we we can't
there's no way of critiquing it there's
no way of having a sensible debate about
it and so she she says some more let me
just pick it up and then I'm going to
skip to the the next part she says quote
the first word to child learns are words
denoting visual objects and he retains
his first Concepts visually observe that
the visual form he gives them is reduced
to those Essentials which distinguish
the particular kind of entities from all
others for instance the universal type
of a child's drawing of man in the form
of an oval for the Torso a circle for
the head four sticks for the extremities
Etc such drawings are a visual record
the process of abstraction and concept
formation in a mind's transition from
the perceptual level to the full
vocabulary of the conceptual level end
quote how does she know
how does she know this again is this the
realm of pure speculation a child might
very well be drawing in that way not
because that's what they think a person
looks like but because they simply don't
yet have the dexterity of hand the skill
the knowledge of how to draw better they
they know what a person looks like by
looking I would say just as well as an
adult does but they haven't learned yet
how to represent arms and legs but Rand
is kind of saying that oh you know what
they see is just these sticks as arms
and that these are a visual record of
the process of abstraction and concept
format I don't think they are I don't
think they are who knows what it means
she's presuming to be able to get in the
mind of a child this is why it's not
objective knowledge this is not
objectivist this is subjectivist we're
completely in the realm of the mind and
debating about the context of the Mind a
debate which cannot be settled by
interrogating the people we're talking
about because by around definition
they're not verbal yet this is why we
need to begin the epistemology in a
place where we can talk about sensibly
what's going on and we can interrogate
the people involved the scientists and
so on insofar as we need to or at least
interrogate from a distance from their
writings and from the process well
historically documented about what went
on what problems Newton and Kepler and
Galileo were solving what what problems
Darwin was engaged in how it is what he
did physically in order to do what he
did and once we've got that
understanding of how knowledge is
created in science it's a very small
leap to say well this is our knowledge
is created in history and a very small
leak to say well this is how knowledge
is created in in Morality and politics
and Mathematics everywhere else this is
what's going on it's human minds are to
it so therefore this is how human Minds
construct knowledge that gives us a
little bit more of an insight about
what's going on in those Minds if you
start that way because we can talk about
all that stuff and so therefore by
necessity this is how all people which
includes children actually create
knowledge via this process of conjecture
where they're fallible in doing so
but it's that that creating explanations
about the world generating explanations
even as children even as children are
doing that and that they're correcting
misconceptions as they go along it may
very well be that children begin with
complex inexplicit explanations of the
world they have an understanding of
cause and effect in a way and that's how
it begins rather than this concept
formation that is a highly derivative
thing that comes later that eventually
they figure out an explanation not a
definition an explanation of what a
table is the table is this object that
functions in a certain way it's going to
have to do its shape it's not about
shape I don't think it's about shape at
all that it's about a table is used to
put stuff on that's what you use a table
for and we can separate it out from all
other objects that exist throughout the
house things like chairs that's what you
sit on but you don't sit on a table
that's a plausible story nothing to do
with the shape of the thing after all if
it's to do with the shape then what
shape is it a rectangle or a circle
you know some modern houses might have
triangular tables glass tables
I've seen tables I know my parents have
had a table before that that is very
misshapen made of very natural wood
piece of Oak that's sort of you know the
bits and pieces out of it shape is a
very poor way of forming a concept of
what a table is Rand is I would say
categorically wrong about this
fundamentally foundationally wrong about
this and that a child more than likely
forms an explanation of certain objects
in their environment that explanation
might not be in words or it might be but
it might not be but they have an
understanding Ah that's where not in so
many words but that's where you put the
stuff the stuff goes on the table and
that's what separates tables from other
things more than anything else a table
is where you sit where the chairs go
there's usually chairs associated with
tables
you move towards the table and you're
near the table you don't spend as much
time around a chest of drawers let's say
as what you do a table but there are
certain things that a chest of drawers
that are also kind of like tables
because you put things on them but that
big box over there out of which we get
the cold stuff the fridge there's not
much on that so that doesn't count as a
table a bench is kind of like a table
but you don't have chairs around it
quite often but sometimes you do but it
doesn't seem to count as a tail because
it's connected physically to the wall
these are the kind of explanations I
imagine that a child would come up with
and then eventually has the word that
they can put onto all these things and
goes aha all those things that have that
in common that's a table but it comes
down to an explanation the explanation
tells you what they have in common it's
not just listing these Elemental things
these units as Rand would have it's all
a problem with from the ground up excuse
the pun with rand's philosophy and
epistemology in this particular case of
trying to to create epistemology as
a process resembling something going on
in mathematics we need to begin with
axioms using rules of inference and you
get to these higher order things
theorems in her case Concepts so it's
been nearly an hour and I've been
through I've you know she doesn't get
much Beyond talking about language this
is how she thinks concepts are forms and
we've seen that that's flawed
foundationally flawed even when she
comes to talking about things like
mathematics you know she uses Trope
examples like you know two plus two and
so on but it's all about words it's not
about problems it's not about
explanations it's not genuinely about
knowledge no the word knowledge does
appear throughout this but not very
often it's not not front and center but
that is the concern of epistemology the
central concern of epistemology is
knowledge okay I'm skipping a fair bit
I'm not really as I say I'm not reading
the entirety of this before I've read it
before I found it dry uninspiring and
uninformative especially when you've
read pop run you did the clarity of the
writing there to my mind I know some
people struggle with proper but all you
have to do is to put popper up against
any other philosopher and you'll realize
there's a black and white difference in
terms of how clear and common sensical
the writing is
it's not like normal philosophy it's not
this use of jargon and use of abstracted
examples let me just read another little
bit of what Rand has to say here in the
world and we'll give up on it for now I
need to speak to an objectivist have a
conversation with them in order to have
the ideas and counter one another period
epistemology and iron's objectivist
epistemology as I say a supporter of
Rand when it comes to other areas of her
philosophy which I do not think depend
upon this
her defense of capitalism for example
goes to the history drawing examples
from history about how this stuff works
why she can't do that with epistemology
I don't know well I do know she she
seems to be ignorant of science she's
not grounded in science so to speak
words probably misused but at least Papa
throughout all of his work it's example
after example the instances of where the
the actual epistemology of his is shown
to operate but what we get from Rand is
let me read another short Passage
she writes quote this is you know a
little bit further on from concept
formation quote man's particular type of
Consciousness is the distinguishing
characteristic by which a child at a
certain level of his development
differentiates him from all other
entities by observing the similarities
among cat dog horse bird and by
differentiating them from other entities
he integrates them into the wider
concept animal and later includes man in
this wider concept the definition of
animal in general terms would be a
living entity possessing the faculties
of Consciousness and Locomotion end
quote well I mean how many problems can
we fit into a single paragraph there
firstly she's attributing Consciousness
to all animals so that's what her
definition of an animal is how does she
know how does she know Locomotion I
don't think so you know some animals
don't move what about a paralyzed person
a quadriplegic person something like
that they're not going to move or a
person with locked in syndrome it
doesn't have anything to do with it
there are the what an animal is is what
biology tells us animals are that's it
okay now the the old high school
definition of certain characteristics
now it's it's down to genetics these
days so this is wrong this is wrong but
also it's all about observing the
similarity she says among cat and dog so
you start again you start with it's it's
inductivist in order to figure out what
a cat is Where You observe the
similarities between the cats there's
cat number one there's there's thing
number one thing number two thing number
three thing number four all those things
are cats they're for all things that are
like that are they for cats that could
be furry and has claws and so on and so
forth it's very inductivist this is how
concept formation Works under and
she can't escape from induction she
doesn't know she can't think of anything
Beyond induction doesn't realize this is
a solution to induction that you don't
just have deduction and induction
observing particulars into in order to
form a a general Universal thing this is
not how we understand what animals are I
I I dispute the fact that children form
Concepts in this way that first you
build up particular examples and then
you have this overarching umbrella thing
animal maybe they begin with animal and
maybe they recognize that animal is
anything out there in the world that
isn't a person by the way because we
rarely refer to people as animals I
think there's a good argument that you
know people these days should be
considered as something other than
animals so we've got this word animal
but we're a third kind of thing there's
plant well third but if you're going to
say you're going to divide things you
normally see out there that are alive
plants and animals okay you've got
bacteria as well and archaea fungi I
would say people don't really belong to
it People Are People we're separate
again okay we have a lot in common with
animals but then again animals have a
lot in common with trees don't they you
know not everything there's a crucial
difference between plants and animals
well I would say there's a crucial
difference between people and all other
animals one of which very well might be
Consciousness we don't know what
Consciousness is but she's attributing
it to all animals there why I don't know
but she's right to say man's particular
type of Consciousness is distinguishing
characteristic by which a child
differentiates him from all other
entities I'm I'm on her page I'm on her
side there I happen to think
Consciousness may very well be
intimately tied to the capacity to
generate explanatory knowledge in which
case if it is if I'm right about that
then she's wrong that all other animals
have it because I agree with her that
it's the distinguishing characteristic
that allows a child to do this mental
stuff to do this knowledge formation
stuff other animals don't have that
though so why she's saying she's
conflating two things there indeed she
goes on to say quote man's
distinguishing characteristic his
rational faculty is omitted from the
definition of animal on the principle
that an animal must possess
some type of Consciousness but may
possess any of the types characterizing
the various units subsumed out of the
New Concept and quite I don't know what
that means okay so she's saying well
they've got some sort of Consciousness
but not this sort of Consciousness that
doesn't really help that doesn't really
help with anything maybe someone else is
able to explain Rand but it has taken
Rand further can understand what she's
saying takes it out of the abstract
euron Brook does a wonderful job of
explaining iron but tends to avoid
detailed exploration of the epistemology
and I think there's an important reason
for that there's so many problems with
this
that it's just root and Branch wrong
when it comes to trying to understand
how it is that people create knowledge
and how it is that people create errors
after all if it was anything like ran
says that you're observing reality in
some way you're just getting the
knowledge from reality deriving it then
wherefore mistakes how is it that we do
we make errors why are people fallible
and if they are fallible which they are
huh
then how do we get knowledge which
presumably is in some way derived from
ontological reality which doesn't
contain errors now popper can account
for this popper explains how it is that
we're just guessing at reality the
function of observation there is not for
us to derive Knowledge from reality
but to distinguish between our guesses
which can make incompatible claims about
reality because observation is Theory
Latin and it can be it's unreliable it
can produce the terrible errors okay so
there is there are a number of other
people out there who try to explain
rand's work so I'm going to just pick
one a a a a a a scholar of Rand of a
Kind okay there are there are more
famous prominent people who do this but
I'll just pick one fellow's work and in
the next podcast I'm going to go
through his work I'm going to explain
one of his essays a short essay
relatively straightforward to to get
through okay I won't get through the
entire thing
um but just for the benefit of
objectivist to see what an objectivist
who's very passionate about Rand and who
thinks Rand got it right then tries to
put rand's epistemology in their own
words so we've looked at ran today and I
think we've found that it doesn't reach
a standard of clarity that might be
found in much of our other writing that
this stuff on epistemology is confused
and it resembles what the Ancients were
saying it's very similar to Plato's view
that you're just getting to these
beliefs about the world she's calling it
concept formation which she means
knowledge but isn't able to explain
what's really going on and just has
avoided completely avoided problems in
science
how knowledge is constructed there
because that's the way you really need
to go so this isn't adding anything if
anything it is um more confusing it
doesn't contain an explanation of
explanation it doesn't contain an
account of knowledge what knowledge
really is has useful information as
information that once instantiated
somewhere in a physical substrate tends
to cause itself to remain so it tends to
get copied and the stuff that solves the
problem the solution the information
that solves the problem
that you have that's what knowledge is
all about how does that happen well
that's what Papa's talks about objective
knowledge is knowledge that need not
exist in Minds that can exist out there
in objects we've talked about that
before okay but until I engage with this
other objectivist other objectivist
writing until then bye-bye